README.md, before:

# rust-overlay

[![CI status](https://github.com/oxalica/rust-overlay/workflows/CI/badge.svg)](https://github.com/oxalica/rust-overlay/actions/workflows/ci.yaml)
[![sync-channels status](https://github.com/oxalica/rust-overlay/workflows/sync-channels/badge.svg)](https://github.com/oxalica/rust-overlay/actions/workflows/sync-channels.yaml)

*Pure and reproducible* overlay for binary distributed rust toolchains.
A compatible but better replacement for rust overlay of [nixpkgs-mozilla].

Hashes of toolchain components are pre-fetched in tree, so the evaluation is *pure* and
no need to have network access. It also works well with [Nix Flakes](https://nixos.wiki/wiki/Flakes).

- The toolchain hashes are auto-updated daily using GitHub Actions.
- Current oldest supported version is stable 1.29.0 and beta/nightly 2018-09-13
  (which are randomly picked and may change over time).

rust-overlay is targeting these channels and they are tested on CI.
Other channels may be supported but are not guarenteed.
- nixpkgs-unstable
- nixos-21.11 (for Linux)

For migration from [nixpkgs-mozilla], see [this section](#migration-from-nixpkgs-mozilla).

## Installation

### Classic Nix overlay

You can put the code below into your `~/.config/nixpkgs/overlays.nix`.
```nix
[ (import (builtins.fetchTarball "https://github.com/oxalica/rust-overlay/archive/master.tar.gz")) ]
```
Then the provided attribute paths are available in nix command.
```bash
$ nix-env -iA rust-bin.stable.latest.default # Do anything you like.
```

Alternatively, you can install it into nix channels.
```bash
$ nix-channel --add https://github.com/oxalica/rust-overlay/archive/master.tar.gz rust-overlay
$ nix-channel --update
```
And then feel free to use it anywhere like
`import <nixpkgs> { overlays = [ (import <rust-overlay>) ]; }` in your nix shell environment.

### Nix Flakes

This repository already has flake support.

NOTE: **Only the output `overlay` is stable and preferred to be used in your flake.**
Other outputs like `packages` and `defaultPackage` are for human try and are subject to change.

For a quick play, just use `nix shell` to bring the latest stable rust toolchain into scope.
(All commands below requires preview version of Nix with flake support.)
```shell
$ nix shell github:oxalica/rust-overlay
$ rustc --version
rustc 1.49.0 (e1884a8e3 2020-12-29)
$ cargo --version
cargo 1.49.0 (d00d64df9 2020-12-05)
```

#### Use in NixOS Configuration

Here's an example of using it in nixos configuration.
```nix
{
  description = "My configuration";

  inputs = {
    nixpkgs.url = "github:NixOS/nixpkgs/nixos-unstable";
    rust-overlay.url = "github:oxalica/rust-overlay";
  };

  outputs = { nixpkgs, rust-overlay, ... }: {
    nixosConfigurations = {
      hostname = nixpkgs.lib.nixosSystem {
        system = "x86_64-linux";
        modules = [
          ./configuration.nix # Your system configuration.
          ({ pkgs, ... }: {
            nixpkgs.overlays = [ rust-overlay.overlay ];
            environment.systemPackages = [ pkgs.rust-bin.stable.latest.default ];
          })
        ];
      };
    };
  };
}
```

#### Use in `devShell` for `nix develop`

Running `nix develop` will create a shell with the default beta Rust toolchain installed:

```nix
{
  description = "A devShell example";

  inputs = {
    nixpkgs.url      = "github:NixOS/nixpkgs/nixos-unstable";
    rust-overlay.url = "github:oxalica/rust-overlay";
    flake-utils.url  = "github:numtide/flake-utils";
  };

  outputs = { self, nixpkgs, rust-overlay, flake-utils, ... }:
    flake-utils.lib.eachDefaultSystem (system:
      let
        overlays = [ (import rust-overlay) ];
        pkgs = import nixpkgs {
          inherit system overlays;
        };
      in
      with pkgs;
      {
        devShells.default = mkShell {
          buildInputs = [
            openssl
            pkgconfig
            exa
            fd
            rust-bin.beta.latest.default
          ];

          shellHook = ''
            alias ls=exa
            alias find=fd
          '';
        };
      }
    );
}

```

### Migration from [nixpkgs-mozilla]

1. Change the channel URL to `https://github.com/oxalica/rust-overlay/archive/master.tar.gz`,
   or flake URL to `github:oxalica/rust-overlay` for Nix Flakes.
2. Good to go! `latest.*`, `rustChannel*.*` and friends are made compatible with [nixpkgs-mozilla].
   You don't necessary need to change anything.
3. You can also optionally change to [the `rust-bin` interface](#cheat-sheet-common-usage-of-rust-bin),
   which provides more functionality like "latest nightly with specific components available" or
   "from `rust-toolchain` file". It also has nix-aware cross-compilation support.

## Cheat sheet: common usage of `rust-bin`

- Latest stable or beta rust profile.

  ```nix
  rust-bin.stable.latest.default # Stable rust, default profile. If not sure, always choose this.
  rust-bin.beta.latest.default   # Wanna test beta compiler.
  rust-bin.stable.latest.minimal # I don't need anything other than rustc, cargo, rust-std. Bye rustfmt, clippy, etc.
  rust-bin.beta.latest.minimal
  ```

  It provides the same components as which installed by `rustup install`'s `default` or `minimal` profiles.

  Almost always, `default` is what you want for development.

  *Note: For difference between `default` and `minimal` profiles, see
  [rustup - Profiles][rust-profiles]*

- Latest stable or beta rust profile, **with extra components or target support**.

  ```nix
  rust-bin.stable.latest.default.override {
    extensions = [ "rust-src" ];
    targets = [ "arm-unknown-linux-gnueabihf" ];
  }
  ```

- Latest **nightly** rust profile.

  ```nix
  rust-bin.selectLatestNightlyWith (toolchain: toolchain.default) # or `toolchain.minimal`
  ```

  *Note: Don't use `rust-bin.nightly.latest`. Your build would fail when some components missing on some days.
  Always use `selectLatestNightlyWith` instead.*

- Latest **nightly** rust profile, **with extra components or target support**.

  ```nix
  rust-bin.selectLatestNightlyWith (toolchain: toolchain.default.override {
    extensions = [ "rust-src" ];
    targets = [ "arm-unknown-linux-gnueabihf" ];
  })
  ```

- A specific version of rust:
  ```nix
  rust-bin.stable."1.48.0".default
  rust-bin.beta."2021-01-01".default
  rust-bin.nightly."2020-12-31".default
  ```

  *Note: All of them are `override`-able like examples above.*

- If you already have a [`rust-toolchain` file for rustup][rust-toolchain],
  you can simply use `fromRustupToolchainFile` to get the customized toolchain derivation.

  ```nix
  rust-bin.fromRustupToolchainFile ./rust-toolchain
  ```

- Toolchain with specific rustc git revision.

  This is useful for development of rust components like [MIRI][miri], which requires a specific revision of rust.
  ```nix
  rust-bin.fromRustcRev {
    rev = "a2cd91ceb0f156cb442d75e12dc77c3d064cdde4";
    components = {
      rustc = "sha256-x+OkPVStX00AiC3GupIdGzWluIK1BnI4ZCBbg72+ZuI=";
      rust-src = "sha256-13PpzzYtd769Xkb0QzHpNfYCOnLMWFolc9QyYq98z2k=";
    };
  }
  ```

  *Warning: This may not always work (including the example below) since upstream CI periodically purges old artifacts.*

- There also an cross-compilation example in [`examples/cross-aarch64`].

## More documentations

- [Reference of all public attributes](docs/reference.md)
- [Cross compilation](docs/cross_compilation.md)

[nixpkgs-mozilla]: https://github.com/mozilla/nixpkgs-mozilla
[rust-toolchain]: https://rust-lang.github.io/rustup/overrides.html#the-toolchain-file
[rust-profiles]: https://rust-lang.github.io/rustup/concepts/profiles.html
[miri]: https://github.com/rust-lang/miri
[`examples/cross-aarch64`]: https://github.com/oxalica/rust-overlay/tree/master/examples/cross-aarch64

Commit message:

Refactor flake output structures
- `defaultOverlay` -> `overlays.default`
  The old name is kept but with a warning.
- `defaultApp` is removed.
- `defaultPackage` -> `packages.default`
- Names in `packages` now use `_` instead of `-` for version separator.
  Eg. `rust_1_49_0`, `rust-nightly_2022-06-29`.
- `rust{,-nightly,-beta}-latest` are removed.

README.md, after:

# rust-overlay

[![CI status](https://github.com/oxalica/rust-overlay/workflows/CI/badge.svg)](https://github.com/oxalica/rust-overlay/actions/workflows/ci.yaml)
[![sync-channels status](https://github.com/oxalica/rust-overlay/workflows/sync-channels/badge.svg)](https://github.com/oxalica/rust-overlay/actions/workflows/sync-channels.yaml)

*Pure and reproducible* overlay for binary distributed rust toolchains.
A compatible but better replacement for rust overlay of [nixpkgs-mozilla].

Hashes of toolchain components are pre-fetched in tree, so the evaluation is *pure* and
no need to have network access. It also works well with [Nix Flakes](https://nixos.wiki/wiki/Flakes).

- The toolchain hashes are auto-updated daily using GitHub Actions.
- Current oldest supported version is stable 1.29.0 and beta/nightly 2018-09-13
  (which are randomly picked and may change over time).

rust-overlay is targeting these channels and they are tested on CI.
Other channels may be supported but are not guarenteed.
- nixpkgs-unstable
- nixos-21.11 (for Linux)

For migration from [nixpkgs-mozilla], see [this section](#migration-from-nixpkgs-mozilla).

## Installation

### Classic Nix overlay

You can put the code below into your `~/.config/nixpkgs/overlays.nix`.
```nix
[ (import (builtins.fetchTarball "https://github.com/oxalica/rust-overlay/archive/master.tar.gz")) ]
```
Then the provided attribute paths are available in nix command.
```bash
$ nix-env -iA rust-bin.stable.latest.default # Do anything you like.
```

Alternatively, you can install it into nix channels.
```bash
$ nix-channel --add https://github.com/oxalica/rust-overlay/archive/master.tar.gz rust-overlay
$ nix-channel --update
```
And then feel free to use it anywhere like
`import <nixpkgs> { overlays = [ (import <rust-overlay>) ]; }` in your nix shell environment.

### Nix Flakes

This repository already has flake support.

**Warning: Only the output `overlay`/`overlays` are currently stable. Use other outputs at your own risk!**

For a quick play, just use `nix shell` to bring the latest stable rust toolchain into scope.
(All commands below requires preview version of Nix with flake support.)
```shell
$ nix shell github:oxalica/rust-overlay
$ rustc --version # This is only an example. You may get a newer version here.
rustc 1.49.0 (e1884a8e3 2020-12-29)
$ cargo --version
cargo 1.49.0 (d00d64df9 2020-12-05)
```

#### Use in NixOS Configuration

Here's an example of using it in nixos configuration.
```nix
{
  description = "My configuration";

  inputs = {
    nixpkgs.url = "github:NixOS/nixpkgs/nixos-unstable";
    rust-overlay.url = "github:oxalica/rust-overlay";
  };

  outputs = { nixpkgs, rust-overlay, ... }: {
    nixosConfigurations = {
      hostname = nixpkgs.lib.nixosSystem {
        system = "x86_64-linux";
        modules = [
          ./configuration.nix # Your system configuration.
          ({ pkgs, ... }: {
            nixpkgs.overlays = [ rust-overlay.overlay ];
            environment.systemPackages = [ pkgs.rust-bin.stable.latest.default ];
          })
        ];
      };
    };
  };
}
```

#### Use in `devShell` for `nix develop`

Running `nix develop` will create a shell with the default beta Rust toolchain installed:

```nix
{
  description = "A devShell example";

  inputs = {
    nixpkgs.url      = "github:NixOS/nixpkgs/nixos-unstable";
    rust-overlay.url = "github:oxalica/rust-overlay";
    flake-utils.url  = "github:numtide/flake-utils";
  };

  outputs = { self, nixpkgs, rust-overlay, flake-utils, ... }:
    flake-utils.lib.eachDefaultSystem (system:
      let
        overlays = [ (import rust-overlay) ];
        pkgs = import nixpkgs {
          inherit system overlays;
        };
      in
      with pkgs;
      {
        devShells.default = mkShell {
          buildInputs = [
            openssl
            pkgconfig
            exa
            fd
            rust-bin.beta.latest.default
          ];

          shellHook = ''
            alias ls=exa
            alias find=fd
          '';
        };
      }
    );
}

```

### Migration from [nixpkgs-mozilla]

1. Change the channel URL to `https://github.com/oxalica/rust-overlay/archive/master.tar.gz`,
   or flake URL to `github:oxalica/rust-overlay` for Nix Flakes.
2. Good to go! `latest.*`, `rustChannel*.*` and friends are made compatible with [nixpkgs-mozilla].
   You don't necessary need to change anything.
3. You can also optionally change to [the `rust-bin` interface](#cheat-sheet-common-usage-of-rust-bin),
   which provides more functionality like "latest nightly with specific components available" or
   "from `rust-toolchain` file". It also has nix-aware cross-compilation support.

## Cheat sheet: common usage of `rust-bin`

- Latest stable or beta rust profile.

  ```nix
  rust-bin.stable.latest.default # Stable rust, default profile. If not sure, always choose this.
  rust-bin.beta.latest.default   # Wanna test beta compiler.
  rust-bin.stable.latest.minimal # I don't need anything other than rustc, cargo, rust-std. Bye rustfmt, clippy, etc.
  rust-bin.beta.latest.minimal
  ```

  It provides the same components as which installed by `rustup install`'s `default` or `minimal` profiles.

  Almost always, `default` is what you want for development.

  *Note: For difference between `default` and `minimal` profiles, see
  [rustup - Profiles][rust-profiles]*

- Latest stable or beta rust profile, **with extra components or target support**.

  ```nix
  rust-bin.stable.latest.default.override {
    extensions = [ "rust-src" ];
    targets = [ "arm-unknown-linux-gnueabihf" ];
  }
  ```

- Latest **nightly** rust profile.

  ```nix
  rust-bin.selectLatestNightlyWith (toolchain: toolchain.default) # or `toolchain.minimal`
  ```

  *Note: Don't use `rust-bin.nightly.latest`. Your build would fail when some components missing on some days.
  Always use `selectLatestNightlyWith` instead.*

- Latest **nightly** rust profile, **with extra components or target support**.

  ```nix
  rust-bin.selectLatestNightlyWith (toolchain: toolchain.default.override {
    extensions = [ "rust-src" ];
    targets = [ "arm-unknown-linux-gnueabihf" ];
  })
  ```

- A specific version of rust:
  ```nix
  rust-bin.stable."1.48.0".default
  rust-bin.beta."2021-01-01".default
  rust-bin.nightly."2020-12-31".default
  ```

  *Note: All of them are `override`-able like examples above.*

- If you already have a [`rust-toolchain` file for rustup][rust-toolchain],
  you can simply use `fromRustupToolchainFile` to get the customized toolchain derivation.

  ```nix
  rust-bin.fromRustupToolchainFile ./rust-toolchain
  ```

- Toolchain with specific rustc git revision.

  This is useful for development of rust components like [MIRI][miri], which requires a specific revision of rust.
  ```nix
  rust-bin.fromRustcRev {
    rev = "a2cd91ceb0f156cb442d75e12dc77c3d064cdde4";
    components = {
      rustc = "sha256-x+OkPVStX00AiC3GupIdGzWluIK1BnI4ZCBbg72+ZuI=";
      rust-src = "sha256-13PpzzYtd769Xkb0QzHpNfYCOnLMWFolc9QyYq98z2k=";
    };
  }
  ```

  *Warning: This may not always work (including the example below) since upstream CI periodically purges old artifacts.*

- There also an cross-compilation example in [`examples/cross-aarch64`].

## More documentations

- [Reference of all public attributes](docs/reference.md)
- [Cross compilation](docs/cross_compilation.md)

[nixpkgs-mozilla]: https://github.com/mozilla/nixpkgs-mozilla
[rust-toolchain]: https://rust-lang.github.io/rustup/overrides.html#the-toolchain-file
[rust-profiles]: https://rust-lang.github.io/rustup/concepts/profiles.html
[miri]: https://github.com/rust-lang/miri
[`examples/cross-aarch64`]: https://github.com/oxalica/rust-overlay/tree/master/examples/cross-aarch64
